README.md, before:

# Smart Lights

An esp32 project to create smart lights with different modes. The lights will function as alarms, help with timeblindness, and probably some cool stuff too! The end goal is to have smart lights with user-friendly phone/computer interface, but doesn't depend on an internet connection to function (they're smart enough to when to turn on with out having to be being told every single time).

## The Modes

The core of the project is the modes themselves! The modes can be active or background: background modes are a constant loop, and active modes function as alarms that interrupt the current background mode. Cancelling an active mode resumes the background mode from where it left off. Any mode can be called as active or background, depending on the event that triggers the mode. Down the road, I want to add networking with a phone app and maybe google home or something. When the user requests an arbitrary mode be set, the incoming mode will be active so that it can barge in front of whatever is currently happening and doesn't affect the background loop.

If the mode is background, pressing the off button will toggle the state of the lights. If the mode is active, the button will cancel the mode, but some modes will block cancelling during their time window.

The modes are intended to be reusable, so that the same modes with the same behaviours can be called at different times of the day. They are also intended to be unique system-wide, so that multiple devices with different LED colours can call the same events with the same modes. This should (hopefully) help the interface UX, for example multiple devices can share an alarm that can be edited once for all of the devices, and the same modes can be called by different events at different times of day with the exact same behaviour. If your weekday alarm is for 6:45am, you don't want to have to change the same alarm on every single device every time there's a bank holiday!

### 1 Constant Brightness

Brightness does not change with time. Just a normal, dimmable light.

**Active Behaviour:**
Just forces itself on. Pressing the off button instead cancels the mode and loads the background mode.

**Background Behaviour:**
N/A

### 2 Sunrise Mode

The minimum brightness increases at a constant rate. The brightness can be increased above the minimum and won't change until the minimum catches up, but the brightness can't be dimmed below the minimum. If the brightness is somehow below the minimum (i.e. the device turns on mid-mode), the brightness should increase rapidly (i.e. r = 255/[10 seconds]) to catch up with the min.

With it being a sunrise, the end device brightness should be 100%, but because the light channels are split, some channels may not be 100% (i.e. for RGB lights you may want a blueer light with less red and green) so no checking is done on the device. The interface app should have a colour picker that determines the ratio of the channels, and always sets the most dominant channel to 255.

// TODO: block switching off until window ends
// TODO: do I want the dimmable limits to be set by the mode or by the event?
// TODO: should the rate be adjusted to a minimum window of 5 minutes?

**Active Behaviour:**

Blocks cancelling until the window is finished. Can't be turned off or dimmed below min line. If a active new mode is loaded mid-window, it'll suggest a quick change to its maximum settings.

**Background Behaviour:**

Can be turned off or dimmed during window, but doing so resets the interpolation until the window is finished. After it's finished, it can be turned off. This is a "waking up" mode; there will be no escaping the waking up. If a new mode is loaded mid-window, it'll suggest the current values to the next mode.

### 3 Sunset Mode

The set brightness decays at a constant rate until it reaches a target brightness. The target can be set to any value including 0, so that this mode can be called several times over the evening and night to create a gradual dim and colour change over the night. If the light is dimmed to 0 and switched back on, the on brightness will be the target brightness.

When triggered, it will take the initial colour channel brightnesses and rapidly (i.e. over 10 seconds) change the colour channels to the ratio set in the mode data packet.

**Active Behaviour:**

Brightness can't be increased above the target slope. // TODO: this should be bound by hardware minimum brightness
// TODO: block cancelling for a period of time?
// TODO: block cancelling until ambient light level is below a threshold?

**Background Behaviour:**

### 4 Pulse

Flashes between a min and max brightness at a constant rate. Can be used to make cool colour patterns or as an alarm. Adjusting the brightness will shift the min and max brightnesses of the pulse.

// TODO: when cancelled, it should finish rising to it's max brightness before handing over to the background mode. Dimming the light should still work, but it will have to finish the colour change.
// TODO: should the final rise match the period, or happen quickly (i.e. 10 seconds)?

**Active Behaviour:**

Brightness cannot be adjusted.
// TODO: option to block cancelling until room is empty?

**Background Behaviour:**

Brightness can be adjusted. This mode could be combined with an ambient light sensor to flash late at night if other lights are on.

**Quick Change Behaviour:**

// TODO: do i want this? If the half period is less than the window, quick change should occur over the period.

### 5 Chirp

Pulse, but with increasing (or decreasing) frequency. This is meant as an alarm. It doesn't *have* to be an alarm, but it's not exactly a "chill vibes" mode.

**Active Behaviour:**

// TODO: option to block cancelling until room is empty?

**Background Behaviour:**

Max brightness can be adjusted.

### 6 Changing

The brightness and/or colours change over the time window. It's intended for longer-term changes, eg turning from green to red over the course of a week, but can be set to a minute or two. This is actually a sneaky addition for a different project idea: a chore chart that changes colour depending on deadline. Some chores are weekly or more, hence the long time window.

**Active Behaviour:**

**Background Behaviour:**

## Configs

### Modal Lights

- **minOnBrightness:** If the light is switched off then on, it'll turn on to the previous brightness or minOnBrightness, whichever is higher. If the light is dimmed to off, it turns on to minOnBrightness. If the light is switched off and the brightness adjusted up, the adjustment starts at 0 brightness.

## Important Defines

```c++
#define NUMBER_OF_LIGHTS_CHANNELS 1 // the number of light channels, i.e. RGB = 3, but a single led type = 1
// TODO: define NUMBER_OF_LIGHTS_CHANNELS in pre-compile script based off ACTIVE_CHANNELS
// #define ACTIVE_CHANNELS 0b00011100  // flag of the channels being used

#define DataPreloadChunkSize 5      // the number of events or modes to preload from storage. smaller number means more calls to FRAM/EEPROM/whatever, but reduces the risk of memory overflow
```

## Interface App / Network System Requirments

- the app needs to check if two active (or two background) modes have the same activation times, otherwise the mode switching will be indeterminate
- needs to have a force-cancel alarms option. updating a triggering alarm will not cancel it.

## Usage

### Events

#### Adding Events

events should be added to EventManager first as it will perform checks. If the event is good, then add it to DataStorageClass.

#### Removing and Updating Events

Events should be removed/updated from EventManager and DataStorageClass independantly. EventManager shouldn't need to access storage for removal and updates

### DeviceTime

DeviceTime primarily uses an onboard register to manage device time. The register uses UTC time in microseconds since 2000. The 2000 epoch is compatible with the BLE-SIG specified Device Time Service. This project doesn't need a resolution greater the milliseconds, but the esp32 timer peripheral can only do microseconds and the time buffer shouldn't overflow until we're all dead anyway.

The time should default to the BUILD_TIMESTAMP when the program starts. It should also write BUILD_TIMESTAMP to the RTC chip if the RTC time is 0, meaning a fresh upload won't need extra steps to set the time!

#### With RTC

// TODO: i don't want this. fetching from RTC can freeze functionality, so I want the RTOS loop to check the timeFault flag instead

The RTC_interface stores the local timestamp, and should be written to when dst or timezone changes. Yeah this is pretty awkward, but it means the reference time will be locally correct if there's some kind of fault with the configManager (like if configs are written to a bad block or something). This shouldn't effect the usage at all.

### Data Storage

Data storage will ultimately happen in 3 locations: (1) on the phone app, which then syncs with (2) the homeserver as soon as possible. The home server will then sync the changes with (3) the relavent devices.

#### Device Storage

Ideally, this will be FRAM or EEPROM, but if there's space maybe a local filesystem for less involved lights (i.e. a UV lamp isn't going to be bright enough for most of the modes to be useful, so it probably won't get a lot of writes and changes).

#### Data Validation

Data can get corrupted, so it's important that the server can check that the information stored on the devices is still correct.

// TODO: since the storage headers can also be corrupted, maybe the server should store the expected locations as well?

#### Corrupt stored data

CRC will be used to validate individual mode packets recieved from network and after writing to storage, and maybe when loading from storage if it's not too slow. The device should alert the server, which should then request a data validation.

Commit message:

ModalLights - bit of refactoring, bit of cleanup - all constant brightness tests that can pass, do

README.md, after:

# Smart Lights

An esp32 project to create smart lights with different modes. The lights will function as alarms, help with timeblindness, and probably some cool stuff too! The end goal is to have smart lights with user-friendly phone/computer interface, but doesn't depend on an internet connection to function (they're smart enough to when to turn on with out having to be being told every single time).

## The Modes

The core of the project is the modes themselves! The modes can be active or background: background modes are a constant loop, and active modes function as alarms that interrupt the current background mode. Cancelling an active mode resumes the background mode from where it left off. Any mode can be called as active or background, depending on the event that triggers the mode. Down the road, I want to add networking with a phone app and maybe google home or something. When the user requests an arbitrary mode be set, the incoming mode will be active so that it can barge in front of whatever is currently happening and doesn't affect the background loop.

If the mode is background, pressing the off button will toggle the state of the lights. If the mode is active, the button will cancel the mode, but some modes will block cancelling during their time window.

The modes are intended to be reusable, so that the same modes with the same behaviours can be called at different times of the day. They are also intended to be unique system-wide, so that multiple devices with different LED colours can call the same events with the same modes. This should (hopefully) help the interface UX, for example multiple devices can share an alarm that can be edited once for all of the devices, and the same modes can be called by different events at different times of day with the exact same behaviour. If your weekday alarm is for 6:45am, you don't want to have to change the same alarm on every single device every time there's a bank holiday!

The mode data seperates overall brightness from relative colour brightnesses. Setting the colours individually would make overall brightness an N-dimensional problem, and seperating them reduces it down to ~1D (i.e. just a brightness level knob). When setting the colours, at least one of the channels must be the max brightness of 255. There will still be a change in brightness during interpolation, as RGB[255, 255, 255] is obviously going to be brighter than RGB[255, 0, 0] and interpolating between them will see a change in power output (a non-linear change if overall brightness also changes). ModalLightsController will not normalise the colours to a constant power output because *I* don't want to limit brightness to 1/3 of the hardware maximum, but if *you* want to, the lights HAL class will be the place to do it.

### 1 Constant Brightness

Brightness does not change with time. Just a normal, dimmable light.

**Active Behaviour:**
Just forces itself on. Pressing the off button instead cancels the mode and loads the background mode. Brightness can't be set below the hardware minimum. The minimumActive brightness will be added to the hardwareMinimum.

**Background Behaviour:**
If a minimum brightness is given but the mode is triggered as background, the minimum brightness is ignored.

### 2 Sunrise Mode

The minimum brightness increases at a constant rate. The brightness can be increased above the minimum and won't change until the minimum catches up, but the brightness can't be dimmed below the minimum. If the brightness is somehow below the minimum (i.e. the device turns on mid-mode), the brightness should increase rapidly (i.e. r = 255/[10 seconds]) to catch up with the min.

With it being a sunrise, the end device brightness should be 100%, but because the light channels are split, some channels may not be 100% (i.e. for RGB lights you may want a blueer light with less red and green) so no checking is done on the device. The interface app should have a colour picker that determines the ratio of the channels, and always sets the most dominant channel to 255.

// TODO: block switching off until window ends
// TODO: do I want the dimmable limits to be set by the mode or by the event?
// TODO: should the rate be adjusted to a minimum window of 5 minutes?

**Active Behaviour:**

Blocks cancelling until the window is finished. Can't be turned off or dimmed below min line. If a active new mode is loaded mid-window, it'll suggest a quick change to its maximum settings.

**Background Behaviour:**

Can be turned off or dimmed during window, but doing so resets the interpolation until the window is finished. After it's finished, it can be turned off. This is a "waking up" mode; there will be no escaping the waking up. If a new mode is loaded mid-window, it'll suggest the current values to the next mode.

### 3 Sunset Mode

The set brightness decays at a constant rate until it reaches a target brightness. The target can be set to any value including 0, so that this mode can be called several times over the evening and night to create a gradual dim and colour change over the night. If the light is dimmed to 0 and switched back on, the on brightness will be the target brightness.

When triggered, it will take the initial colour channel brightnesses and rapidly (i.e. over 10 seconds) change the colour channels to the ratio set in the mode data packet.

**Active Behaviour:**

Brightness can't be increased above the target slope. // TODO: this should be bound by hardware minimum brightness
// TODO: block cancelling for a period of time?
// TODO: block cancelling until ambient light level is below a threshold?

**Background Behaviour:**

### 4 Pulse

Flashes between a min and max brightness at a constant rate. Can be used to make cool colour patterns or as an alarm. Adjusting the brightness will shift the min and max brightnesses of the pulse.

// TODO: when cancelled, it should finish rising to it's max brightness before handing over to the background mode. Dimming the light should still work, but it will have to finish the colour change.
// TODO: should the final rise match the period, or happen quickly (i.e. 10 seconds)?

**Active Behaviour:**

Brightness cannot be adjusted.
// TODO: option to block cancelling until room is empty?

**Background Behaviour:**

Brightness can be adjusted. This mode could be combined with an ambient light sensor to flash late at night if other lights are on.

**Quick Change Behaviour:**

// TODO: do i want this? If the half period is less than the window, quick change should occur over the period.

### 5 Chirp

Pulse, but with increasing (or decreasing) frequency. This is meant as an alarm. It doesn't *have* to be an alarm, but it's not exactly a "chill vibes" mode.

**Active Behaviour:**

// TODO: option to block cancelling until room is empty?

**Background Behaviour:**

Max brightness can be adjusted.

### 6 Changing

The brightness and/or colours change over the time window. It's intended for longer-term changes, eg turning from green to red over the course of a week, but can be set to a minute or two. This is actually a sneaky addition for a different project idea: a chore chart that changes colour depending on deadline. Some chores are weekly or more, hence the long time window.

**Active Behaviour:**

**Background Behaviour:**

## Configs

### Modal Lights

- **minOnBrightness:** If the light is switched off then on, it'll turn on to the previous brightness or minOnBrightness, whichever is higher. If the light is dimmed to off, it turns on to minOnBrightness. If the light is switched off and the brightness adjusted up, the adjustment starts at 0 brightness.

## Important Defines

```c++
#define NUMBER_OF_LIGHTS_CHANNELS 1 // the number of light channels, i.e. RGB = 3, but a single led type = 1
// TODO: define NUMBER_OF_LIGHTS_CHANNELS in pre-compile script based off ACTIVE_CHANNELS
// #define ACTIVE_CHANNELS 0b00011100  // flag of the channels being used

#define DataPreloadChunkSize 5      // the number of events or modes to preload from storage. smaller number means more calls to FRAM/EEPROM/whatever, but reduces the risk of memory overflow
```

## Interface App / Network System Requirments

- the app needs to check if two active (or two background) modes have the same activation times, otherwise the mode switching will be indeterminate
- needs to have a force-cancel alarms option. updating a triggering alarm will not cancel it.

## Usage

### Events

#### Adding Events

events should be added to EventManager first as it will perform checks. If the event is good, then add it to DataStorageClass.

#### Removing and Updating Events

Events should be removed/updated from EventManager and DataStorageClass independantly. EventManager shouldn't need to access storage for removal and updates

### DeviceTime

DeviceTime primarily uses an onboard register to manage device time. The register uses UTC time in microseconds since 2000. The 2000 epoch is compatible with the BLE-SIG specified Device Time Service. This project doesn't need a resolution greater the milliseconds, but the esp32 timer peripheral can only do microseconds and the time buffer shouldn't overflow until we're all dead anyway.

The time should default to the BUILD_TIMESTAMP when the program starts. It should also write BUILD_TIMESTAMP to the RTC chip if the RTC time is 0, meaning a fresh upload won't need extra steps to set the time!

#### With RTC

// TODO: i don't want this. fetching from RTC can freeze functionality, so I want the RTOS loop to check the timeFault flag instead

The RTC_interface stores the local timestamp, and should be written to when dst or timezone changes. Yeah this is pretty awkward, but it means the reference time will be locally correct if there's some kind of fault with the configManager (like if configs are written to a bad block or something). This shouldn't effect the usage at all.

### Data Storage

Data storage will ultimately happen in 3 locations: (1) on the phone app, which then syncs with (2) the homeserver as soon as possible. The home server will then sync the changes with (3) the relavent devices.

#### Device Storage

Ideally, this will be FRAM or EEPROM, but if there's space maybe a local filesystem for less involved lights (i.e. a UV lamp isn't going to be bright enough for most of the modes to be useful, so it probably won't get a lot of writes and changes).

#### Data Validation

Data can get corrupted, so it's important that the server can check that the information stored on the devices is still correct.

// TODO: since the storage headers can also be corrupted, maybe the server should store the expected locations as well?

#### Corrupt stored data

CRC will be used to validate individual mode packets recieved from network and after writing to storage, and maybe when loading from storage if it's not too slow. The device should alert the server, which should then request a data validation.
